NFL Week 3 Wrap: Stand and Deliver

Selfishly, I wish that Broncos-Seahawks game had been what we saw in last year’s Super Bowl.1 Can you imagine? Peyton Manning intercepted while driving his team down for a game-winning score, only to launch an improbable 80-yard, no-timeout drive with 59 seconds to go before getting an impossible catch from Demaryius Thomas to tie the game on a two-point conversion. And then, for all that, Manning never sees the ball again, as Seattle wins the toss, marches downfield, and pounds the ball into the end zone for a game-winning score before their backup cornerback proposes on the field. Instead, we got the blowout in February and the fabulously exciting comeback on Sunday. Pour one out for narratives that never were.

As impressive as Seattle was in absolutely shutting Denver down for three quarters, all I want to talk about is that drive. I mean, it’s one thing that it came against the most notorious pass defense in football, but the Broncos were also in the Seahawks’ famously terrifying home stadium with the game on the line and no timeouts. It would have been insane to pull off that drive at home against the worst pass defense in the league. I went and used the pro-football-reference.com Drive Finder to try to find similar drives to Manning’s from Sunday, and there just aren’t many. Looking at all drives where a team down by seven or eight points took over inside its own 25-yard line with 75 seconds or less left to go, other teams scored touchdowns on just two of their 76 previous attempts since 1998.2 The Broncos had a 4 percent win expectancy when the drive started.

And yet, somehow, it was one of the simplest drives you will ever see. The Broncos threw the ball six times, completing three passes for 80 yards, and they ran some variant of the same concept on most of those plays. Denver offensive coordinator Adam Gase called plays that were designed to attack Seattle cornerback Byron Maxwell and eat up a soft Cover 3 shell, and sure enough, that’s exactly what happened. Here’s a GIF from the first long play of the drive, the 42-yard catch by Emmanuel Sanders:



The two receivers on that side are running switch verticals, which is simply a pair of verticals (or go routes) in which the receivers change lanes at a given point during the route. Phil Simms noted after the drive that Pete Carroll must not have taught the Seahawks defensive backs “how to defend against that situation,” which is unlikely, given that it’s a basic concept and one the Seahawks ran on offense repeatedly last season.

The idea is to get the outside receiver, here Thomas, to carry the cornerback (Maxwell) with his go route inside. That creates a window for Manning to try to hit Sanders with his throw to the vacated zone before Maxwell has handed off the responsibility for covering Thomas to the safety in the middle of the field (Earl Thomas) and returned to the sideline. A great cornerback might be able to read what was happening and cover Demaryius Thomas while sitting on Sanders’s route and remaining close enough to make a play on any throw to the outside — but there’s a lot of “and’s” in that sentence for a reason: It’s tough as hell. Maxwell just doesn’t have the ability and the awareness to do all that at the same level as a Richard Sherman, and the Broncos counted on that in targeting him on this drive. Manning was nearly sacked, but he found just enough space and had just enough arm strength to get the ball to Sanders for a huge play.

You can see the concept again on the touchdown pass to Jacob Tamme, here in an All-22 clip from the telecast. Note that this is a rare play in which Earl Thomas is actually playing in a robber’s spot about 15 yards past the line of scrimmage, while Kam Chancellor patrols as the deep safety. Watch both safeties converge on Demaryius Thomas’s deep post as Maxwell carries his route too far to the center of the field and leaves the sideline wide open for Tamme:



Maxwell and the underneath linebacker, K.J. Wright, realize what’s happening at almost exactly the same time. Wright isn’t deep enough to contest the route, and Maxwell is a step too late in turning back toward the sideline. The Seahawks might have been bailed out with some pass pressure or a subpar throw, but Manning delivers a perfect strike to Tamme, who hangs on to tie the game.

This isn’t some secret new trick to beat Cover 3 and prove the Seattle defense is really a bunch of frauds. It takes precise timing on the route combinations, a great quarterback, and an offensive line that holds up long enough for the routes to break. It looks simple in these two GIFs, but there’s a reason Denver didn’t make it look quite this easy for the first 59 minutes of the game. The Seahawks got steady pressure on Manning, knocking him down eight times, albeit with just one sack. They dared Denver to run and shut down the Broncos when they tried to do so, with Montee Ball & Co. producing just 36 yards on 20 carries.

Of course, the Seahawks should be applauded for responding by shutting the door on Denver’s comeback with their next drive.3 Seattle won the toss and launched a 13-play, 80-yard sequence to win the game. It was the sort of steady drive that Seattle produces at its best, with two incompletions and 11 plays that resulted in a first down, touchdown, or kept Seattle ahead of schedule for a new set of downs. Those 11 plays each went for 5 yards or more, and while the Broncos were able to get to Russell Wilson during the second half, they looked gassed during overtime. Once Seattle picked up a third-and-3 and moved the ball onto Denver’s side of the field shortly thereafter, it felt like Denver was trying to avoid the big play and keep Seattle to a field goal. Instead, an incredible trio of blocks on the final snap created a mammoth hole for Marshawn Lynch, who waltzed into the end zone to end an entertaining rematch.
