Michelle Obama hits trail for endangered Dems, while husband stays home

Democratic candidates finally have found an Obama they're not afraid to be seen with. 

While President Obama dutifully avoids battleground races this midterm season, first lady Michelle Obama is tiptoeing into the fray in a bid to drum up votes for party allies in tight contests. 

The president's better half stumped for the first time in a 2014 race earlier this month, hitting the trail for Georgia Senate Democratic candidate Michelle Nunn. And she's expected to travel to Iowa soon in support of Senate candidate Rep. Bruce Braley. 

The logic behind dispatching the first lady isn't hard to grasp. While the president's approval ratings are hovering around 40 percent, rendering him political Kryptonite to Democrats in tough races, Michelle Obama's are considerably higher -- 62 percent, according to a summertime Pew Research Center survey. 

"They are looking for an A-lister they can find except for President Obama," said Amos Snead, former spokesman for former-House GOP Whip Roy Blunt (now a senator). He added: "I think it's telling that of the two, six years into a presidency, the first lady is the only one who can go out there with them." 

David Yepsen, director of the Southern Illinois Paul Simon Public Policy Institute and former chief political reporter for the Des Moines Register, said he sees "no downside" to sending Michelle Obama to help with turnout in close Senate races. 

He said the goal is to fire up voters, and turn out those who normally do not show up in non-presidential elections. 

During Michelle Obama's visit for Nunn, she largely avoided controversial topics like foreign affairs. She focused instead on the importance of voting and the effects a Republican sweep at the polls could have on the remaining two years of the Obama administration. 

In Iowa, where Democratic nominee Braley is in almost a dead heat with Republican state Sen. Joni Ernst, the first lady's visit could help rev up a race which has no clear frontrunner. Braley also came under fire back in June for an ad against Ernst that critics called sexist -- Michelle Obama could help shore up his numbers among female voters. 

The first lady's planned visit to Iowa in October has been confirmed by the White House and Braley campaign, though few other details have emerged. 

Yepsen said the first lady's late-in-the-race appearances come at "the right time," for a "greater impact." He says if the Democrats had tried to tout her a few months ago, the hype would have been lost by election time. Her timing now falls when parties are pushing voter registration and early voting. "It's a good time ... these are less motivated voters, they haven't been paying attention earlier," he said. 

However, Republican strategist Tim Albrecht, former communications director for Iowa Gov. Terry Branstad and current director of Redwave Digital in Des Moines, believes the first lady won't have the impact Democrats are hoping for, calling it a "pipe dream." 
